adapter/README.md, before:

PCB adapter for Raspberry Pi to Hub75 RGB Matrixes
==================================================

Since hand-wiring can be a little tedious, here are some PCBs that help
with the wiring when using the `rpi-rgb-led-matrix` code.

   * [Passive](./passive) is the simplest one, directly wiring the GPIO pins
     to the Hub75 IDC connectors for up to two parallel chains (for
     40 GPIO pin Raspberry Pis. Older 26 GPIO pin Raspberry Pis can connect
     to one chain).
   * [Active](./active) Similar to the passive PCB, but does level
     shifting 3.3V -> 5V and provides convenient breakouts for I²C and serial.
   * [Active3](./active-3) Like the active board, but supports three parallel
      chains with level shifting. Due to the additional amount of GPIO pins
      needed, I²C and serial can't be used when all three ports are used.
      ([Buy the boards from OSH Park][osh-active3]).
      
![Three Panels connected][three-panels]
[Get board at OSH-Park][osh-active3]

[three-panels]: ../img/three-parallel-panels.jpg
[osh-active3]: https://oshpark.com/shared_projects/D2hXjnYT

Commit message:

o add notice that layout may change soon.

adapter/README.md, after:

PCB adapter for Raspberry Pi to Hub75 RGB Matrixes
==================================================

**(Note: I am working on a change in the pinout to better accomodate various constraints.
Please contact me if you intend to build and adapter, maybe it makes sense to wait a week).**

Since hand-wiring can be a little tedious, here are some PCBs that help
with the wiring when using the `rpi-rgb-led-matrix` code.

   * [Passive](./passive) is the simplest one, directly wiring the GPIO pins
     to the Hub75 IDC connectors for up to two parallel chains (for
     40 GPIO pin Raspberry Pis. Older 26 GPIO pin Raspberry Pis can connect
     to one chain).
   * [Active](./active) Similar to the passive PCB, but does level
     shifting 3.3V -> 5V and provides convenient breakouts for I²C and serial.
   * [Active3](./active-3) Like the active board, but supports three parallel
      chains with level shifting. Due to the additional amount of GPIO pins
      needed, I²C and serial can't be used when all three ports are used.

![Three Panels connected][three-panels]

[three-panels]: ../img/three-parallel-panels.jpg
